UEI is a network that allows different parties to conduct energy transactions, functioning like a universal translator for energy that connects different digital platforms that deal with energy and its derivatives. It’s an adaptation of the Beckn protocol which is an open protocol that connects consumers and providers on an interoperable network, the same technology that powers India’s healthcare interface, UHI and the ecommerce revolution ONDC. UEI connects all energy providers on one network. It works by allowing the station to buy cheaper green energy from anywhere in India instead of buying expensive energy directly from the grid. It creates a virtual marketplace where anyone with excess green energy from solar roofs to idle electric busses can sell it back to the grid. UEI already has about 13000 daily charging sessions with a high possibility of even greater numbers. It enables the creation of contracts for energy consumption and storage. It doesn't transfer energy physically, but instead creates contracts that result in physical transfer. At its core, V2G technology enables a two-way flow of electricity between EVs and the power grid. This means that when an EV isn't being driven, it can feed electricity back into the grid, helping balance energy demand and supply. V2G technology offers several benefits such as grid stability as the vehicle can supply power during times of peak demand, reducing the strain on the grid. By storing and redirecting excess energy as and when needed, it promotes a cleaner energy use with renewable energy integration. EV owners can also potentially earn by supplying energy back to the grid similar to a solar roofing system. This technology, however is not entirely commercial-ready with few cases of on-road practical use outside of India. As with new technologies, this too has its challenges but multiple research and development projects being held show a promising future where the flow of energy is rather a cycle than unidirectional.
The convenience to swap a battery when the vehicle is low on charge is unparalleled to charging solutions even with fast-charging systems on the rise. Swapping a battery offers multiple benefits with a quicker “recharge” time and even longer ranges. Battery swapping, although not new, is a great and useful technology that is yet to be perfected and made into a wide-spread norm. A number of organizations from global giants like Suzuki and Honda to Indic companies like SUN Mobility are all working to provide battery swapping stations throughout India marking a significant leap forward in India's EV landscape, addressing key challenges such as charging infrastructure, vehicle affordability, and sustainable energy utilization. Suzuki has further plans of installing fast-charging points across cities to alleviate consumer concerns about battery drainage and the scarcity of charging facilities.
For decades, the idea of solar powered vehicles has been fiction of sorts, but reality is catching up with multiple iterations of the technology albeit not perfect or entirely solar-powered. A vehicle being charged as its being driven is not only impressive but also great for the environment and your pocket. Vayve Mobility’s Eva is India's first solar electric car. 'Eva' integrates solar panels to harness solar energy, extending its driving range and reducing dependence on conventional charging infrastructure. This technology coupled with swappable batteries and highly accessible charging points can immensely aid in India’s growth. With applications in public transportation and commercial such as the new fleet of vehicles by EKA Mobility, integrating such a system of renewable energy production can not only make EV’s more sustainable but also a lot more affordable.
Lithium-ion batteries used by current EVs use liquid electrolytes. While all-solid-state batteries feature solid electrolytes. By changing electrolytes from liquid to solid, batteries can achieve a variety of outstanding battery characteristics. Solid state batteries are safer than lithium-ion batteries as they are less prone to thermal runaway and fire hazard. They offer significantly higher ranges and a longer lifespan (8,000 to 10,000 cycles) as compared to the 1,500 to 2,000 charge cycles of a lithium-ion battery. Multiple companies are developing EVs with solid state batteries with promises of availability by Honda, MG, Toyota and Ola among others. This promising shift to a new battery technology can improve upon multiple aspects such as range, safety, faster recharging rates and ultimately the overall perception of EVs by the masses.
